Add Release Notes for EMQX e5.1.1 (#2013)
emqtt/emq-docs-cn: en_US/changes/changes-ee-5.1.md

Reviewer: Missing https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11169

Author: SparkplugB is planned to be released in e5.2.0, so this PR is not verified in e5.1.1

- [#11103](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11103) Updated `erlcloud` dependency.

- [#11106](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11106) Added validation for the maximum number of `worker_pool_size` of a bridge resource.

  Now the maximum amount is 1024 to avoid large memory consumption from an unreasonable number of workers.

- [#11118](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11118) Ensured that validation errors in REST API responses are slightly less confusing. Now, if there are out-of-range errors, they will be presented as `{"value": 42, "reason": {"expected": "1..10"}, ...}`, replacing the previous usage of `expected_type` with `expected`.

- [#11126](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11126) Rule metrics for async mode bridges will set failure counters correctly now.

- [#11134](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11134) Fixed the value of the uppercase `authorization` header not being obfuscated in the log.

- [#11139](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11139) The Redis connector has been refactored into its own Erlang application to improve the code structure.

- [#11145](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11145) Added several fixes and improvements in Ekka and Mria.

  Ekka:

>   - Improved cluster discovery log messages to consistently describe actual events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Improved cluster discovery log messages to consistently describe actual events.
```

>   [Ekka PR](https://github.com/emqx/ekka/pull/204).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  [Ekka PR](https://github.com/emqx/ekka/pull/204)
```

>   - Removed deprecated cluster auto-clean configuration parameter (it has been moved to Mria)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Removed deprecated cluster auto-clean configuration parameter (it has been moved to Mria).
```

>   [Ekka PR](https://github.com/emqx/ekka/pull/203).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  [Ekka PR](https://github.com/emqx/ekka/pull/203)
```

- [#11226](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11226) Unified the listener switch to `enable`, while being compatible with the previous `enabled`.

- [#11249](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11249) Added `/license/setting` REST API endpoint to read and update licensed connections usage alarm watermark.

- [#11251](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11251) Added the `/cluster/topology` REST API endpoint:

  A `GET` request to this endpoint returns the cluster topology, showing connections between RLOG core and replicant nodes.

- [#11253](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11253) The Webhook/HTTP bridge has been refactored into its own Erlang application. This allows for more flexibility in the future and allows the bridge to be run as a standalone application.

- [#11079](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11079) Added support for custom headers in messages for Kafka bridge producer mode.

- [#11132](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11132) Added support for MQTT action authorization based on QoS level and Retain flag values.

>   Now, EMQX can verify whether clients have the permission to publish/subscribe using specific QoS levels and also have the permission to publish retained messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Now, EMQX can verify whether clients have the permission to publish/subscribe using specific QoS levels, and whether they have the permission to publish retained messages.
```

- [#11294](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11294) Fixed `emqx ctl cluster join`, `leave`, and `status` commands.

- [#11306](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11306) Fixed rule action metrics inconsistency where dropped requests were not accounted for.

- [#11309](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11309) Improved startup order of EMQX applications. Simplified build scripts and improved code reuse.
  
- [#11322](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11322) Added support for importing additional configurations from EMQX backup file (`emqx ctl import` command):
  
  - rule_engine (previously not imported due to the bug)
  - topic_metrics (previously not implemented)
  - slow_subs (previously not implemented).
  
- [#10645](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/10645) Changed health check for Oracle Database, PostgreSQL, MySQL and Kafka Producer data bridges to ensure target table/topic exists.

- [#11107](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11107) MongoDB bridge health check now returns the failure reason.

- [#11139](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11139) The Redis bridge has been refactored into its own Erlang application to improve the code structure and to make it easier to maintain.

> - [#11151](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11151) The MySQL bridge has been refactored to its own Erlang application to improve the code structure and to make it easier to maintain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11151](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11151) The MySQL bridge has been refactored into its own Erlang application to improve the code structure and to make it easier to maintain.
```

- [#11163](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11163) Hid `topology.pool_size` in MondoDB bridges and fixed it to 1 to avoid confusion.

- [#11175](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11175) Now when using a nonexistent hostname for connecting to MySQL, a 400 error is returned rather than 503 in the REST API.

- [#11198](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11198) Fixed global rebalance status evaluation on replicant nodes. Previously, `/api/v5/load_rebalance/global_status` API method could return incomplete results if handled by a replicant node.
  

> - [#11223](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11223) In InfluxDB bridging, mixing decimals and integers in a field may lead to serialization failure in the Influx Line Protocol, resulting in the inability to write to the InfluxDB bridge (when the decimal point is 0, InfluxDB mistakenly interprets it as an integer)..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11223](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11223) In InfluxDB bridging, mixing decimals and integers in a field may lead to serialization failure in the Influx Line Protocol, resulting in the inability to write to the InfluxDB bridge (when the decimal point is 0, InfluxDB mistakenly interprets it as an integer).
```

- [#11266](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11266) Fixed and improved support for TDengine `insert` syntax:

  1. Added support for inserting into multi-table in the template.

     For example:

     `insert into table_1 values (${ts}, '${id}', '${topic}')
     table_2 values (${ts}, '${id}', '${topic}')`

  2. Added support for mixing prefixes/suffixes and placeholders in the template.

     For example:

     `insert into table_${topic} values (${ts}, '${id}', '${topic}')`

     Note: This is a breaking change. Previously, the values of string type were quoted automatically, but now they must be quoted explicitly.

     For example:

     `insert into table values (${ts}, '${a_string}')`

- [#11307](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11307) Fixed check for table existence to return a more friendly message in the Oracle bridge.

- [#11316](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11316) Fixed Pool Size value not being considered in Oracle Bridge.

- [#11326](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11326) Fixed return error checking on table validation in the Oracle bridge.

> ### [Known Issues](https://github.com/emqx/emqx-docs/blob/release-5.1/en_US/changes/known-issues-5.1.1.md)

Reviewer: this document does not exist

Author: This file will be added after sorting out "Known Issues"

  
  - `emqx_ctl conf show cluster` no longer displays irrelevant configuration items when `discovery_strategy=static`.
  Configuration information related to `etcd/k8s/dns` will not be shown.
  - Removed `zones `(deprecated config key) from `emqx_ctl conf show_keys`.
  
- [#11165](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11165) Removed the `/configs/limiter` API from `swagger.json`. Only the API documentation was removed,
  and the `/configs/limiter` API functionalities remain unchanged.

- [#11166](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11166) Added 3 random SQL functions to the rule engine:
  
  - `random()`: Generates a random number between 0 and 1 (0.0 =< X < 1.0).
  - `uuid_v4()`: Generates a random UUID (version 4) string.
  - `uuid_v4_no_hyphen()`: Generates a random UUID (version 4) string without hyphens.
  
- [#11180](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11180) Added a new configuration API `/configs` (GET/PUT) that supports reloading the Hocon format configuration file.

- [#11226](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11226) Unified the listener switch to `enable`, while being compatible with the previous `enabled`.

> - [#11249](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11249) Added support for an HTTP API to set alarm watermark of license.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11249](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11249) Added `/license/setting` HTTP API endpoint to read and update licensed connections usage alarm watermark.
```

- [#11251](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11251) Added the `/cluster/topology` HTTP API endpoint:

  A `GET` request to this endpoint returns the cluster topology, showing connections between RLOG core and replicant nodes.

- [#11253](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11253) The Webhook/HTTP bridge has been refactored into its own Erlang application. This allows for more flexibility in the future and allows the bridge to be run as a standalone application.

- [#11079](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11079) Added support for custom headers in messages for Kafka producer bridge.

- [#11132](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11132) Added support for MQTT action authorization based on QoS level and Retain flag values.

>   EMQX can now check ACL to verify whether a client has permission to publish/subscribe using a specified QoS level and to use retained messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  EMQX can now use ACL to verify whether a client has permission to publish/subscribe with a specified QoS level and whether it can write retained messages.
```

- [#11207](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11207) Updated the dependent versions of multiple data bridges to enhance security and ensure that sensitive data will not be leaked. This includes:
  
  - TDEngine
  - MongoDB
  - MySQL
  - Clickhouse

- [#11241](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11241) Schema Registry has been refactored into its own Erlang application. This allows for more flexibility in the future.

- [#11020](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11020) Upgraded emqtt dependency to prevent sensitive data leakage in the debug log.

- [#11135](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11135) Improved time offset parser in rule engine and return uniform error codes.

- [#11236](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11236) Improved the speed of clients querying in HTTP API `/clients` endpoint with default parameters.

- [#11282](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11282) Added indexing to the rule engine's topic matching to improve rule search performance.

## Bug Fixes

- [#11004](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11004) Wildcards are no longer allowed for the destination topic in rewrite rules.

> - [#11026](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11026) Addressed an inconsistency in the usage of `div` and `mod` operations within the rule engine. Previously, the `div'` operation could only be used as an infix operation and `mod` could only be applied through a function call. Now both `div` and `mod` can be used via function call syntax and infix syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11026](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11026) Addressed an inconsistency in the usage of `div` and `mod` operations within the rule engine. Previously, the `div'` operation could only be used as an infix operation, and `mod` could only be applied through a function call. Now, both `div` and `mod` can be used via function call syntax and infix syntax.
```

- [#11134](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11134) Fixed the value of the uppercase `authorization` header not being obfuscated.

- [#11139](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11139) The Redis connector has been refactored into its own Erlang application to improve the code structure.

- [#11145](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11145) Added several fixes and improvements in Ekka and Mria.

  Ekka:
  - Improved cluster discovery log messages to consistently describe actual events
  [Ekka PR](https://github.com/emqx/ekka/pull/204).
  - Removed deprecated cluster auto-clean configuration parameter (it has been moved to Mria)
  [Ekka PR](https://github.com/emqx/ekka/pull/203).

  Mria:
  - Ping now only runs on replicant nodes. Previously, `mria_lb` was trying to ping both stopped and running
  replicant nodes, which could result in timeout errors.
  [Mria PR](https://github.com/emqx/mria/pull/146)
  - Used `null_copies` storage when copying `$mria_rlog_sync` table.
  This fix has no effect on EMQX for now, as `$mria_rlog_sync` is only used in `mria:sync_transaction/2,3,4`,
  which is not utilized by EMQX.
  [Mria PR](https://github.com/emqx/mria/pull/144)

> - [#11148](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11148) Fixed an issue when a node left the cluster, other nodes still tried to synchronize configuration update operations to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11148](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11148) Fixed an issue when nodes tried to synchronize configuration update operations to a node which has already left the cluster.
```

- [#11150](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11150) Wait for Mria table when emqx_psk app is being started to ensure that PSK data is synced to replicant nodes even if they don't have init PSK file.
  
- [#11151](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11151) The MySQL connector has been refactored into its own Erlang application to improve the code structure.

- [#11158](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11158) Wait for Mria table when the mnesia backend of retainer starts to avoid a possible error of the retainer when joining a cluster.

- [#11162](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11162) Fixed an issue in webhook bridge where, in async query mode, HTTP status codes like 4XX and 5XX would be treated as successes in the bridge metrics.

- [#11164](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11164) Reintroduced support for nested (i.e.: `${payload.a.b.c}`) placeholders for extracting data from rule action messages without the need for calling `json_decode(payload)` first.

> - [#11172](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11172) Fixed the `payload` being duplicated in the below situations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11172](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11172) Fixed the `payload` field in rule engine SQL being duplicated in the below situations:
```

  
  - When using a `foreach` sentence without the `as` sub-expression and selecting all fields (using the `*` or omitting the `do` sub-expression).
  
  For example:
  
  `FOREACH payload.sensors FROM "t/#"`
  - When selecting the `payload` field and all fields.
  
  For example:
  
  `SELECT payload.sensors, * FROM "t/#"`
  
- [#11174](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11174) Fixed the encoding of the `server` key coming from an ingress MQTT bridge.

  Before the fix, it was encoded as a list of integers corresponding to the ASCII characters of the server string.

> - [#11184](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11184) Config value for `max_packet_size` now has a max value of 256MB defined by the protocol. This is now enforced and any configuration with a value greater than that will result in a breaking change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11184](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11184) Config value for `max_packet_size` now has a max value of 256MB as defined by the protocol. This is now enforced, and any configuration with a value greater than that will not be accepted.
```

> - [#11192](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11192) Fixed an issue with producing a valid HOCON file when an atom type is used, removing unnecessary `"` from HOCON file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11192](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11192) Fixed an issue with producing invalid HOCON file when an atom type was used. Also removed unnecessary `"` around keys and latin1 strings from HOCON file.
```

  
- [#11195](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11195) Avoided creating duplicated subscriptions by HTTP API or client in Stomp gateway.

- [#11206](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11206) Made the `username` and `password` params of CoAP client optional in connection mode.

- [#11208](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11208) Fixed the issue of abnormal data statistics for LwM2M clients.

> - [#11211](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11211) Consistently returned `404` for `DELETE` operations on non-existent resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11211](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11211) HTTP API `DELETE` operations on non-existent resources now consistently returns `404`.
```

> - [#11214](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11214) Fixed a bug where node configuration may fail to synchronize correctly when joining the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11214](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11214) Fixed a bug where node configuration may fail to synchronize correctly when the node joins the cluster.
```

> - [#11229](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11229) Fixed an issue taht prevented plugins from starting/stopping after changing configuration via `emqx ctl conf load`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11229](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11229) Fixed an issue that prevented plugins from starting/stopping after changing configuration via `emqx ctl conf load`.
```

- [#11237](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11237) The `headers` default value in /prometheus API should be a map instead of a list.

> - [#11250](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11250) Fixed a bug where a WebSocket packet containing more than one MQTT packet would have their order reversed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11250](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11250) Fixed a bug when the order of MQTT packets withing a WebSocket packet will be reversed.
```

- [#11271](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11271) Ensured that the range of percentage type is from 0% to 100%.

- [#11272](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11272) Fixed a typo in the log, where an abnormal `PUBREL` packet was mistakenly referred to as `pubrec`.

- [#11281](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11281) Restored support for the special `$queue/` shared subscription.

> - [#11294](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11294) Fixed `emqx_ctl cluster join`, `leave`, and `status` commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11294](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11294) Fixed `emqx ctl cluster join`, `leave`, and `status` commands.
```

- [#11306](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11306) Fixed rule action metrics inconsistency where dropped requests were not accounted for.

> - [#11309](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11309) Improved startup order of EMQX applications. Simplify build scripts and improved code reuse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11309](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11309) Improved startup order of EMQX applications. Simplified build scripts and improved code reuse.
```

> - [#11322](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11322) Imported additional configurations from EMQX backup file (`emqx ctl import` command):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11322](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11322) Added support for importing additional configurations from EMQX backup file (`emqx ctl import` command):
```

  
  - rule_engine (previously not imported due to the bug)
  - topic_metrics (previously not implemented)
  - slow_subs (previously not implemented).
  
- [#10645](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/10645) Changed health check for Oracle Database, PostgreSql, MySql and Kafka Producer data bridges to ensure target table/topic exists.

> - [#11107](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11107) Now returns the health check failure reason when probing a MongoDB bridge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11107](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11107) MongoDB bridge health check now returns the failure reason.
```

- [#11163](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11163) Fixed `topology.pool_size = 1` and hid such option from users for MondoDB bridges to avoid confusion.

- [#11175](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11175) Now when using a nonexistent hostname for connecting to MySQL, a 400 error is returned rather than 503 in the HTTP API.

- [#11198](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11198) Fixed global rebalance status evaluation on replicant nodes. Previously, `/api/v5/load_rebalance/global_status` API method could return incomplete results if handled by a replicant node.
  
- [#11223](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11223) In InfluxDB bridging, if intend to write using the float data type but the placeholder represents the original value
  as an integer without a decimal point during serialization, it could result in the failure of Influx Line Protocol serialization
  and the inability to write to the InfluxDB bridge.

  See also: [InfluxDB v2.7 Line-Protocol](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2.7/reference/syntax/line-protocol/#float).

> - [#11225](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11225) Fixed the `username` of PostgreSQL/Timescale/MatrixDB bridges, which could be empty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11225](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11225) The `username` field in PostgreSQL/Timescale/MatrixDB bridges configuration is now a required one.
```

- [#11272](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11272) Fix a typo in the log, when EMQX received an abnormal `PUBREL` packet, the `pubrel` was mistakenly typo as `pubrec`.

- [#11281](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11281) Restored support for the special `$queue/` shared subscription.

- [#11294](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11294) Fix `emqx_ctl cluster join`, `leave`, and `status` commands.

- [#11306](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11306) Fixed rule action metrics inconsistency where dropped requests were not accounted for.

- [#11309](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11309) Improve startup order of EMQX applications.
  Simplify build scripts and improve code reuse.

- [#11322](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11322) Import additional configurations from EMQX backup file (`emqx ctl import` command):
  - rule_engine (previously not imported due to the bug)
  - topic_metrics (previously not implemented)
  - slow_subs (previously not implemented).

- [#10645](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/10645) Changes health check for Oracle Database, PostgreSql, MySql and Kafka Producer data bridges to ensure target table/topic exists.

> - [#11090](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11090) Fixed a configuration that prevented the pipelining option from being correctly set for GCP PubSub Producer bridge.

Reviewer: This is incorrect, the linked pull request is "implement GCP PubSub Consumer bridge"

Author: GCP PubSub will be released in 5.2.0, so I will delete it from the release note
